  e koriri rio: the current flows gently <gentle> towards the west e koriri
rake: the current flows gently towards the east.

 (used ironically). e koromara: he is very weak! meaning: he is very strong

 A ka:ro:a, a kabo they are saying goodbye

 I a tia n amarake: I have eaten
 
 I a tia n noriko: I saw you before

 I kaununai: I often get furious 
 
 kauna am kai ma ...: put your stick in opposition to ...

 Ko atai ke ko maing?: Are you right handed or left handed?
 
 I atai: I am right handed.

 Neiei: this lady here
 
 neie: this one who ...

 karimwiu: my younger brother ..., or sister.

 au karimwi: my youngest child.

 aba n anena: a foreign country te I-anena: one who is outside or aloof from
a certain group (family, clan, village, island, company, land, etc.).

 abakei (abakin aei), anaukaei (anauna aei) with a sign to show size: this
size, this length. used also without gesture to designate: very long, very big
 
 ai-ngao: make a nest

 akea te bai iai: it doesn't matter
 
 e buti iai: it goes there, it goes by ...

 am bai: thine (thy thing); baim: thy hand, thy arm. <your>

 ana taekau (taekam, etc.): to ask, obtain, permission for me, you
 
 atong taeka: to pronounce, to repeat, to say

 ana tangira nakon: his love for ana 
 
 tangirai: his love for me

 ana te nano: persuade, convince 
 
 te anai nano: the act of persuading

 are ko taku naba: as you say
 
 are ko taku: which you said.

 bain an tano: minerals, metals
 
 aon tano: on the ground, on the surface of ...

 bain aonaba: things of the world
 
 bain aonteaba: earthly vanities.

 baka, bakabaka: red, vermilion. e baka-tawa, e baka tokinana, e baka morina:
the fruits are red, ripe

 different kinds of soil: tano-bibinang: fine sand, wind blown

 e a moti ikena: he has expired
 
 e a moti ana taeka: his speech is ended.

 e aoraki ngkoananoa, maroaka e aki roko: he was sick yesterday so that is
the reason why he did not come

 maroaka! ko aki roko: so that's why you didn't come!

 e beroro te ang: the wind roars
 
 e beroro n taetae: he talks incessantly

 e iro te ai: the fire has caught
 
 e iroiro tangin te bu: the bu is sounding for a long time.

 e iti karawa: the sky is clear 
 
 e iti aon te taibora: nothing more on the table ..., stakes swept off

 e kangai: he said (or did) thus 
 
 ni kangai: like this

 e karina ni baka: he fell suddenly
 
 e baka ni karina: idem.

 e mori nukana: he is hunch backed 
 
 morimori n taetae: to speak in soft spoken manner

 e nene marakina: his pain persists
 
 nenen te ang: persistence of the wind

 e oo: it stiffens, makes efforts: (baby in bed)

 e oti tai : sunrise
 
 e bung tai: sunset.

 e ruberube te ria: there will be fish to eat, etc.
 
 ka-rubea, karuberubea, kaka ...: to make ...

 e taetae ni kangai: he said ... 
 
 ni kanganne: like that

 e tang te moa: the cock crows 
 
 e tang te aira: the current makes an audible noise

 e toa mau: he can manage alone 
 
 a toamau: they are just the right number ...

 e toka borana: he is successful 
 
 katoka borana: help someone to succeed

 e tokatoka matana: its colour predominates, is brilliant, bright 
 
 e toka matana: he looks down on, proudly

 i-teboran: to throw water on ...
 
 i teborania: reciprocal drenching

 iai te boki irou: I have a book 
 
 e baka irou: It was I who made him fall.

 ira maran: smooth, sleek hair
 
 ira monmon: nice coloured hair

 kabata bai: to blacken the hands
 
 kabata ria: to blacken the lips

 kaboa nako ...: to sell to ...
 
 kaboa mairoun ...: to buy from ...

 kabuti mata: to let eyes wander
 
 kabuti mata ni katobibi: to look all around

 kain te karai: bobbin, spool.
 
 bukarai: drawn thread

 kaka ni maku: to cry out in fear
 
 kaka n un: to challenge, to cry out for vexation

 kaminoa te taeka: to mix up subject
 karaka te taeka: to exaggerate, to add on to ...

 kanakowatia: to make go towards 
 
 kanakomaiaka: to make go or come south

 kanni: trunk of ... (as timber)
 
 banni: leaf <frond> of ...

 kataerieri: whipping, lashing 
 
 e kataerieri te karau: the rain lashes, drives kinds of waves 
 
 te nao uea: big swell

 ko kanga?: what are you saying? 
 
 ko tamatama ni kanga?: how do you manage to climb?

 ko matauninga irou: I offended you

 ko na nakea?: where are you going?
 
 kam nakea?: where did you all go?

 mananga mai, man ...: start from
 
 mananga nakon: start towards.

 maneaban namakaina: halo of moon
 
 te koro maneaba: celebrations for opening a new maneaba.

 marakin te nano: interior pain, moral suffering, sorrow, affliction
 
 te maraki n nano: animosity, spite, grudge, resentment.

 motin te taeka: conclusion, end 
 
 akea te taeka iai: nothing to find fault with, nothing to reply

 n tai nako: every time that ... 
 
 n tabetai: sometimes, occasionally, now and then.

 nako karawa: towards heaven
 
 nako eta: upwards

 nako maiaki: come from the south 
 
 i maiaki: in the south

 nakoim: to thee
 
 nakoimi: to you

 nakomai mainiku: come from the east
 
 waerake, bo-rake: to go up towards the east, towards the ocean side

 nakon Tauro: to Tauro
 
 nakoni Petero: to Peter.

 nibangabanga, ninibangabanga: having many holes
 
 nimaoraki: sickly, always sick.

 nikotatawa: well made for speed 
 
 nikotaungaunga: badly balanced

 o ni bua, buro ni bua: tonsils 
 
 kabi ni bua: pharynx.

 ongo taeka: obedience, to obey 
 
 ongo ana taeka: to listen to, to hear ...

 raroa kinokino: extremely remote:

 ri aon: to go over, to go on

 some parts of hand: ngake ni bai, nano ni bai, raurauni bai, buki ni bai,
roroa ni bai, tonotono ni bai, ika ni bai, tou ni bai, koro ni bai, etc.:

 species: imone: (striped)

 species: uri rereba, uri tangare, ure tabuki:

 tabo-koti: curtailed, cut short
 
 tabo-maki: flattened, bent end.

 tatara te tei: keep an eye on the child, watch it, look after it 
 
 taratara: to watch attentively, to be awake, vigilant, not asleep.

 taura te nenea: candle 
 
 te aba ni mari: land of plenty 
 
 te tai ni mari, te ai ni mari: season of ...

 te airua: confusion, mistake, error, blunder, illusion
 
 kaairua: to confound

 te amarake: eating
 
 te aki amarake: fasting, not eating.

 te amwina: one bunch
 
 ua-amwi: two bunches

 te boki teuana: a certain book
 
 teuana te boki: one book.

 te karau ni kirinaki: heavy rain
 
 tiaki te aomata ni kirinaki: (to indicate a big crowd)

 te katei n aomata: native custom 
 
 te tia katei bai: architect, builder.

 te katete: juice slightly boiled
 
 te taribo: juice boiled longer

 te kaun taeka: dispute, controversy, argument, lively discussion
 
 te moti n taeka: resolution, contract, decision

 te kona: power
 
 te aki kona: powerlessness

 te mamna: a mouthful
 
 ua-onga: two gulps.

 te man ae kakang: a wild animal 
 
 te man n uma: a tame animal

 te moan taeka: capital letter, preface, prologue, introduction
 
 te anga taeka nakon: promise, engagement

 te tei ae biri: the child who runs 
 
 te aomata ae I noria: the man whom I see

 te tia kamaitaki: multiplicand
 
 te reke: product.

 te toki n aine: middle aged woman
 
 te unaine: old woman.

 te ua ni, uan te ni: fruit of coconut tree
 
 te ben: coconut

 te utu ae tabu: the holy family
 
 kau utu: large ...

 tina-u: my mother
 
 bai-u: my hand, my arm

 tingotingo, betingo, betingoingoi, me-n-tingoi: 
 
 maratingo: impregnated with dirt.

 wae iremwe: slow with legs, feet
 
 wi iremwe: slow at eating, talking.